---
layout: post
title: ASN.1 - Common crypto encoding schemes
---

What is ASN.1 and how can I read something that's encoded with "asn.1"?
I'm not going to go into too much detail as there's other online resources that do this.
However, I will link to those resources that do a good job of explaining the details
of these standards. Also I'm not an expert, this is just what I have learnt so
far (some of which may be wrong).

## ASN.1 (Abstract Syntax Notation number One)

I wouldn't get caught up too much on ASN.1, it's just an [IDL](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/IDL_specification_language) 
and not an extremely useful thing to know unless you were defining some new key structure 
(which you probably shouldn't be doing). As the name suggests this actually isn't an encoding or
even a way to encode but an abstract syntax. The easiest way to relate to this is
[Apache Thrift](https://thrift.apache.org/) or [Google Protocol Buffers](https://developers.google.com/protocol-buffers/).
These technologies themselves don't offer anything concrete, but they are the frameworks 
on which to create new encodings and object types. Two common encoding types of ASN.1 for cryptography are DER and PEM.
There are various object types such as public keys, private keys, signatures, curve parameters, etc.
To learn more about ASN see [Introduction to ASN.1​](https://www.itu.int/en/ITU-T/asn1/Pages/introduction.aspx.).

Also I know you could use ASN.1 for other things outside of cryptography, but there
are IDLs with much better tooling and support like Apache Thrift or Google Protocol Buffers.
It's sort of like saying you can still use [SOAP](https://www.w3.org/TR/soap/), but
why would you when better things exist like [JSON API](http://jsonapi.org/)?

## DER (Distinguished Encoding Rules)

ASN.1 defines a bunch of different encoding rules like BER, CER, PER, and DER. However,
by far the most common is DER. There's a pretty good write up about DER on MSDN that
goes into detail about DER: [Distinguished Encoding Rules](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/dd408078.aspx)
so I won't talk about it too much. However, it's a pretty simple encoding
of Tag, Length, Value (or TLV for short). This is a pretty common encoding
scheme across computer science to describe nested data. Just off the top of
my head I can think of four other places this scheme is used: Apache Thrift,
Google Protocol Buffers, Bluetooth Service Discovery Protocol (SDP), and
Bluetooth Low Energy Advertisements. I'm sure there are many others as well.

Again MSDN has some good write ups on DER's TLV encoding scheme:
- [TLV](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/bb540801.aspx)
- [Tag Encoding](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/bb648642.aspx)
- [Length and Value Encoding](https://msdn.microsoft.com/en-us/library/windows/desktop/bb648642.aspx)

## PEM (Privacy-enhanced Electronic Mail)

One thing I've noticed when learning about cryptography is that a lot of the standards
are based and designed around email. Since a lot of web standards rely on text encoding such
as JSON and XML, it makes sense to re-use email standards like PEM designed around text encoding. 
PEM is nothing more than base64 encoded DER with some extra metadata. The extra metadata is
literally a string at the start and end to describe the base64 encoded DER such as
`-----BEGIN CERTIFICATE-----` and `-----END CERTIFICATE-----` for certificates.

## Putting it all together and playing in bash (on macOS)

Now that I have gone over the basics, we can play around with some commands to solidify this
understanding.

- First I created some handy bash commands in my ~/.bash_profile to
make what's going on a little bit easier to read:

In `~/.bash_profile`:
```bash
#!/usr/bin/env bash
function remove-first-and-last-line {
  sed -e "1d" -e "$ d"
}

function remove-line-endings {
  tr -d \\n
}

function hex-to-bin {
  xxd -r -p -
}

function bin-to-hex {
  hexdump -v -e '/1 "%02X"'
  #OR
  #xxd -p | remove-line-endings
}

function parse-der {
  openssl asn1parse -inform der
}

function parse-pem {
  openssl asn1parse -inform pem
}
```

- Next, lets create a folder for playing around:
```bash
cd ~
mkdir crypto-fun
cd crypto-fun
```

- Lets generate a private key using the prime256v1 curve.
```bash
openssl ecparam -name prime256v1 -genkey -noout -out key.pem
```

- Now we have a elliptic curve private key in PEM format so lets see what it looks like in ASN.1:
```bash
cat key.pem | parse-pem
```

- Given what I described above lets try to manually convert the PEM file to DER to make sure the output is the same:
```bash
# First dump the file contents to stdout with cat key.pem
# Next remove the PEM metadata lines: -----BEGIN EC PRIVATE KEY----- and -----END EC PRIVATE KEY----- with remove-first-and-last-line
# Next remove al the line endings to get one full blob of base64 with remove-line-endings
# Next decode the base64 into binary with base64 --decode
# Finally save the output to key.der with > key.der
cat key.pem | remove-first-and-last-line | remove-line-endings | base64 --decode > key.der
cat key.der | parse-der
```

- Lets even diff them just to make sure
```bash
diff <(cat key.pem | parse-pem) <(cat key.der | parse-der)
```

## Extra Information

Note that the above experiment in bash was only to solidify an understanding of ASN.1, PEM and DER. There
are much better commands for parsing specific types of cryptographic objects. For instance, objects like
x509 Certificates often contain DER encoding inside of a DER encoding. Thus instead you should use specific 
commands for parsing those objects. Here's a couple examples 
(I also save these as functions in my ``~/.bash_profile`):

#### Parsing elliptic private keys (like `key.pem` or `key.der` we created earlier):
```bash
cat key.pem | openssl ec -noout -text

# Must specify the input type for OpenSSL as PEM is the default
cat key.der | openssl ec -noout -text -inform der
```

#### Parsing elliptic public keys
```bash
# First lets create the corresponding public key to our private
cat key.pem | openssl ec -pubout -out pub.pem

# Parse the PEM public key
cat pub.pem | openssl ec -pubin -noout -text

# Now lets use openssl to convert the encoding
cat pub.pem | openssl ec -pubin -pubout -out pub.der -outform der

# Parse the DER public key
cat pub.der | openssl ec -pubin -noout -text -inform der
```

There's very similar commands for parsing all types of objects in openssl
basically with this same format. There are some exceptions like public keys where
you have to specify it's a public key:
```bash
cat file | openssl <object_type> -noout -text -inform <der/pem>
```

Unfortunately OpenSSL is not the smart to read the context given by PEM and automatically 
parse that given structure. However, a plus side to that is that it's symmetrical for 
parsing PEM and DER files of the same object type.

## Final Notes

Hopefully you can parse any PEM or DER file with OpenSSL. You can even deconstruct it down to its rawest 
form in bytes and dig through the RFC specifications to map the values. I hope if you read this far that
this was informative and not a huge waste of time. If it was, well sorry.


